 
4
Abstract     
 
These days, builders and building contractors are trying to create solutions for energy efficient 
housing in many ways. A solution that has gained notice is the passive house. The concept is 
based on using only the passive energy that people, electrical appliances and the sun renders. 
One prerequisite is unusually large quantities of insulation in the walls and well insulated 
windows.  
 
Skanska in Örebro are interested in a passive house in Frillesås, outside Kungsbacka, which 
houses four apartments. By comparing and evaluating the house to three other passive houses, 
this study searches for an optimised technical solution for building the house in Örebro. The 
comparison also provides a basis for optimizing the house financially against the heat load 
standards, 10 Watt per square metre, given by the National energy authority. Life cycle cost 
analysis is used as a tool for the economic evaluation of various criteria. 
Another option, not following the heat load standards, is to only seek to financially optimize 
the house from Frillesås, once it is placed in Örebro.  
 
The proposed technical solution is building with studs of steel and only using three layers of 
insulation in the walls. New standards from The National board of housing, building and 
planning has influenced the proposal of steel studs. The disadvantage is that the technique of 
building with steel studs is often new to carpenters and thus requires more time. The passive 
house concept is also new. As follows, two new aspects concurrently come into play. 
Consequently, it is necessary to project well in order to succeed. 
 
The study shows that effect requirements cannot be reached when the house is moved up 
north to Örebro, even though the house has been additionally dimensioned in several aspects. 
The explanation is that Örebro is located in the northern most part of the climate zone which 
determines effect requirements. One hundred kilometers northwards the next climate zone 
begins and there higher effect needs are allowed. Up there the house would easily meet the 
requirements, without any added dimensioning. 
 
Regardless of the requirements for passive houses, the study shows that it pays off to buy 
energy-efficient windows and using Ground source heat pumps for heating hot water. Solar 
collectors are not profitable. Other changes in the climate shell shows that the house from 
Frillesås, in a life cycle economic way, can retain the dimensions of insulations to floor, wall 
and roof. 
 
 
 
 
