 ii
ABSTRACT 
The purpose of this thesis was to find out if it is currently profitable to use VIP in outer wall 
elements in the construction of new buildings.  
 
More than one third of Sweden’s energy is used by the residential sector. From this third, 85% 
is involved in the operation of buildings, where more than a quarter is lost as heat through the 
building envelope. In the construction of new buildings, the focus is on minimizing the 
building cost rather than trying to reduce the large operation cost. However, by developing 
more energy efficient construction solutions, it is possible to decrease the heat loss, therefore 
lowering the high operation cost. 
 
Due to its good insulating ability through minimizing convective heat loss, vacuum insulation 
has been used in fridges and thermos flasks. In Switzerland, this technology has also been 
applied in the building sector by using VIP. As VIP are up to ten times more effective than 
conventional insulation materials, an outer wall with VIP can therefore be very thin.  
 
The area of a building is a feature that can be regulated by a strict local plan (Detaljplan). 
However, VIP make it possible to reduce the thickness of the building envelope and you can 
thereby increase the area for selling with increased income as a result. Because of that, it is of 
interest to examine whether it can be profitable to use VIP in new buildings.   
 
To determine whether it is profitable to use VIP in outer walls, this study investigated two 
main scenarios. The first scenario considered the situation where a building is constructed and 
then sold straight away. This scenario compared the cost of traditional insulation with the cost 
of using VIP in outer walls. The results show that it is more profitable to use VIP because the 
income from the gained area that can be sold is much greater than the increased insulation 
cost. The second scenario involved construction of a building followed by management of the 
building. As this was based on different costs during the lifetime of the building, a life cycle 
cost analysis was made. The results show that for this scenario it is not yet profitable to use 
VIP in the outer walls. This is because the insulation cost of the VIP is larger than the 
decreased operation cost. 
 
