TO ADD / TO ALTER

Thesis booklet
This past year I have been living in Seattle. Living in a new city, country and continent changes you and your 
perspective of things.
A lot of things is very similar to home, and you often hear people comparing Scandinavia and Seattle. They 
mention the similarities in climate, a thing that could explain the he big amount of settlers from the Scandi­
navian countries that arrived in Seattle in the late 1800s. 

And yes, it is similar in some ways. The nature is similar, even though everything is bigger here. The trees 
are taller, the mountains are higher. People are friendly, but not over-friendly - Americans call it the “Seattle 
freeze”. As a Swede, I just think they seem normal. People drink a lot of coffe, and the city is trying to promote 
itself as a bike-city. 
The more I live here, the more differences I notice. Things gets done in a different way here. And the city in 
itself is very different. The urban fabric, with the strict grid  and the zoning rules creates a totally different 
architectural environment, and the city is right now changing in a fast pace.

The more I learn about this city, the more fascinated I get. Even though it’s young, it has already transformed 
itself multiple times and survived both super expansive growth and fire and depression. But it is also a city 
where the different eras have put its mark, and you can clearly read the layers of development. 
But I’m afraid that some things will get lost, some of the things that make Seattle special. This thesis will be 
about how to deal with growth and altering an existing fabric for new needs and visions. 


Matilda Schuman
May 15, 2015
Fame and Merit by Leon Krier
Seattle is growing rapidly. From being a blue collar worker town, with big factories as Boeing, the city 
is changing into a tech-town, with big companies that attract people from all over the world. To keep 
up with the influx of people, the city is in need of creating dense neighborhoods, and when doing 
that a lot of old buildings gets torn down and new buildings rise to the sky. The scale and the urban 
fabric of the city is changing in a fast pace and I wonder what is getting lost.  
But isn’t there any other ways we can think about growth? Other ways of putting value to older struc­
tures? Something that is in-between, in the scale between museological preservation and demoli­
tion? 
I want to explore alternative solutions, something that is in between but still more than keeping a 
thin outer shell of an old structure.
What can we learn from the presence of historic buildings? What do we gain from keeping older 
structures in our urban fabric?

I want to speculate and experiment with how to engage an existing structure and open it up for new 
purposes. I want to explore approaches with how to deal with the existing when adding or changing 
it, and connect theoretical concepts to the physical nature of the architecture. 

To alter
1. To change or make different; modify.
2. To adjust for a better fit.
To add
1. Join (something) to something else so as to increase the size, number, or amount. synonyms: at­
tach, build on, add on, put on, put in, append, adjoin, join, affix, connect, annex; 
2. Put in (an additional element, ingredient, etc.)
Historic buildings create a sense of place and a 
connection to the roots of the City. They are the old 
growth trees of the urban landscape.
(Andrew Haas)
A CITY OF CHANGE
How can a contemporary and philosophical view on altering historic buildings be?
What ways can we as architects work with history and memories in architecture and urban planning 
in general?
What strategies are used when working with existing buildings?
What different design approaches can be identified?
How can the historic be defined in a young city?
What role does the presence of collective history and memory play for newcomersto a city?

What values can be identified in historical/older buildings? 
What is there more than aesthetics?
What role does history and memory play in a growing, young city as Seattle?
How can a historical narrative be implemented in the future city of Seattle?


Memory and fantasty, recollection and imagion­
ation, are related and they have always a situational 
and specific content. One who cannot rember can 
hardly imagine because memory is the soil of the 
imagination.

(Juhani Pallasmaa)
THESIS QUESTIONS
Mapping of different kinds of treatment of historic structures: 
Ruins, memorials, adaptive re-use, fragments, facadeism, historic preservation  
Memory, to memorize, what happens in the brain, related to place 
How historic environments effects us
Questions of authencity 

History as an economic factor
Value 

History as an identity factor
Branding, re-use

Old building techniques
Materiality, tactility, craft
History as a symbol 
Iconography
Growth, density and history 
Urbanism
The aging process - the status of old and aging
In relationship to youth culture, change and future 
Formal aspects of architecture when adding/altering 
Artistic novelty can move us only provided it touches 
something that we already possess in our very being. 
Every profound artistic work surely grows from 
memory, not from rootless intellectual invention. 

(Juhani Pallasmaa)
THEMES TO RESEARCH
1. My thesis will be a personal and visionary work. It will be parts speculative and parts realistic. 
2. My project will position itself in a theoretical way, as well as being a specific architectural proposal 
and I hope that my theoretical studies will feed my spatial investigations. 
3. I am going to work in broad range of scales: The theoretic scale to city scale to neighborhood scale 
to site scale to building scale to interior room scale. I want to spend most of my time in the begin­
ning and the end scales: the theory and the space.

4. My aim is to go into details with questions of light, materiality, texture and the spatial quality of 
interior space.
5. I want my thesis to be a time for me to experiment and a personal laboratory for methods. I 
strongly want to incorporate the written word into my project: both to read and to write as a part of 
the process.
Vocabulary
Experiencing 
Light 
Flow 
Place
Interiority 
Personal
Interaction
In between
Constancy 
Sensory
History 
Memory
Context 
Sharing
City
Alteration
Preservation
Aesthetics
David Chipperfield: Model of Altes Museum
THESIS STATEMENTS
When in Seattle:
Selection of at least three different sites in Seattle. I will collect drawings of existing buildings, take 
photos and gather materials from the sites. I will also gather photos/eventual drawings of specific 
examples from Seattle, that I can analyze and use later on in the process. 

Research method/process:

Along with reading my selected readings (and readings I will find in the process), I will also do case 
studies on specific buildings and in the end map the different strategies and their theoretical per­
spectives. My research will not only include architecture, but also art, philosophy, science and maybe 
some neurobiology. 

After reading most of my text and getting a good base line, I will sort and select what topics that 
makes most sense to continue to develop. I will not stop the research on a certain time, instead try to 
have a process that is open for input also late in the project. The research will not follow a common 
linear path, the research will kick-start in the beginning but then continue on along with the design 
project. My goal is to integrate the reading and writing with the design project, and to make that 
happen I will dedicate a specific reading and time period to each week - ideally one day a week. 

Design development / architectural proposal process:

My hope is that the theoretical explorations will feed the design, and influence what my hand 
sketches. I will in the beginning mainly worked with hand sketching, collages and models, but occa­
sionally do work in the digital world: they are both valuable. The project will gradually be more and 
more computer based, but to continue the link to the craft and the hand I will work with my interior 
spaces in physical daylighting models and always continue explore in hand sketches. 

I see my ideal process as non-linear. I will go in loops, where I work both with the detail and the site 
at the same time, and hopefully the changes of scales will generate a deeper understanding.
Daylighting studies
METHOD & PROCESS
Seattle is located slightly above 47 degrees 30 north latitude, It is almost due north of Portland and 
San Francisco, and due west of Basel, Switzerland and Budapest, Hungary. It is in the very far north 
of the US, but the main factor for explaining the climate is not the latitude, it’s the proximity to the 
Pacific Ocean. 
The city is both bounded by, and sprinkled with smaller areas of water. To the west is the Puged 
Sound, an inland saltwater sea. To the east is Lake Washington, a cool and clean mountain-fed lake. 
In between these two are Lake Union, and the three are connected by two man-made canals.
It is also said to rain a lot in Seattle. A hundred miles west of Seattle, is the wettest spot in the con­
tinental States: Quillayute. Between Seattle and Quillayute, we find the Olympic Mountains, which 
absorb much of the moisture coming off the ocean, making Seattle less rainy than people think. 
The citys annual precipitation is less than that of all the major seaboard cities to the east, but the 
difference is that Seattle gets very little precipitation in the shape of snow and almost never have 
any heavy thunderstorm.  The rain in Seattle is most likely a steady but light, daylong rains that will 
make everything seem wet. 
The Pacific Ocean is also influencing the temperature, the weather is mild for it’s northern position, 
and in general the temperature is ranging from low seventies to mid-thirties.
Seattle is almost never flat. From sea level up to the top of Queen Anne Hill is a difference of 457 
feet, and the top is less than a mile away from the sound. Seattle is sometimes referred to the city of 
seven hills, just like Rome, but there are more hills than that.  
Seattles location, in the northwestern part of US near 
the Canadian border
Seattle
A CITY OF WATER & SEVEN HILLS
Seattle as we know it today was founded in 1851, but the earliest settlement in the region predates 
the Euro-American settlement by several thousand years. It is not known for how the Coast Salish 
tribe had lived here, but at least nine thousand years and they developed the economic and techno­
logical basis of the Northwest Coast culture.
In 1851, a group led by Arthur A Denny established a settlement at Alki Beach, now called West Se­
attle. The location lacked a protected deep-water anchorage, so the community moved to a near by 
site, the east side of Elliot Bay, in March 1852. The initial economic incentive for the community was 
established on year later, when Henry Yesler agreed on building the first steam sawmill on Puget 
Sound in Seattle. In 1889, a big fire that destroyed most of the commercial area of Seattle, and years 
of reconstruction went on afterwards until the panic of 1893 happened, and nothing got built until 
the next period of growth that came along with the Klondike gold rush. Seattle marketed itself as 
the “gateway to Alaska”, and all that wanted to search for gold needed at least one year of supplies to 
be able to enter into Canada. 

The residential fabric of Seattle boomed, and because of the late development and the availability of 
streetcars, a lot of single family houses was built instead of row houses that we seen in older Ameri­
can cities. This have had a great impact on Seattles urban fabric, which is much less dense than most 
European and Eastern US-cities. In 1903, the Olmstedt brothers was invited to propose a strategy 
for how to integrate more green space into the city and presented their park & boulevard plan that 
most of it got realized. Even today a lot of the plan survives and Seattle has a good amount of parks 
and boulevards integrated into the city. 
The steel frame construction method came late to Seattle. Even though we see steel skyscrapers in 
Eastern US already in late 1890s, the first steel frame construction was finished in 1903. Downtown 
moved north, and the old downtown was left and forgotten, which saved the place from demolition.
Smith tower was built 1910-1914, and was the tallest building in Seattle until 1969.
1920s came the automobile era. The city started to spread out even more, and development started 
to happen also where the street cars line didn’t go. 
Seattle in 1872
After the big fire
HISTORICAL ARCHITECTURAL CONTEXT
In the late 1930s, the architects in the region started to form what’s later been called Northwest 
Regional Modernism. It’s not the international modernism, but a modernism that is blended with 
concerns of nature, place, indoor outdoor living, materiality, views etcetera. A lot of wood is used 
and the expression of the structure as a part of the design was important. In the mid 1940s, a lot of 
people started to design with these things in mind and it still carries on in contemporary architec­
tural practices. 

In 1962, Seattle was home for a World’s Fair, called the Century 21 exposition. The exposition was 
themed around the future and what the life would be like in the next century. A lot of new buildings 
was constructed for the fair and most of them still stands today, incorporated in an area now called 
Seattle Center. The most famous structure of the fair, the Space Needle, also became the symbol of 
Seattle. 

In the 1970s, much of the assumptions made in the post-war period were being challenged. A mas­
sive free way building program was proposed, but after the Alaskan Way Viaduct, that runs along 
the whole waterfront, and the Interstate 5 were constructed, residents of the city started protests 
and fought the construction of more free way projects. Seattle also created it’s first designated his­
toric district, in the Pioneer Square area, the city’s historic city center. The historic market - Pike Place 
Market - was also saved from demolition. 

The last two decades of the twentieth century gave a new scale to the downtown of Seattle when a 
lot of skyscrapers were constructed. Also significant for the period was the construction of down­
town housing, supporting a transformation from a pure business district to a multi-use neighbor­
hood. The downtown transit tunnel opened in 1990, providing a route through downtown for buses 
and later the tunnel was modified to also house the light rail trains. 

Text written on basis of Shaping Seattle Architecture, pages 3-31, and lectures in the class Arch 452 - Architecture of Seattle, taught 
by prof. Jeffrey Ochsner
Smith Tower 
Space Needle
With an estimate of 652000 residents in 2013, Seattle is the biggest city in the state of Washington 
and in the Puget Sound region. The Seattle-Tacoma-Belleveue metropolitan region is home to more 
than 3,5 million residents. In the recent years, the city has seen a steady pace population growth, 
and planners think that the city will grow by 200,000 more residents until 2040. The city works to 
increase the number of residents living in downtown, and changed the zoning rules to allow higher 
buildings for residential use.

The recession in 2008 affected Seattle, but not as much as other American cities. The city continued 
to have a stable economy and a lot of start up companies found their home in the city. Big compa­
nies still dominate the economic landscape, with the headquarters of Starbucks, Amazon and the 
department store Nordstorm. 

The port of Seattle still serves as a major gateway for trade with Alaska and Asia. 

The city is served by an extensive bus service system, and there is also several bus companies run­
ning express buses to connect to the suburbs. The Light Link rail, a partly underground street car sys­
tem, is right now only connecting the airport with Downtown. In the forthcoming years, it is going 
to expand northwards, linking the Capitol Hill area with the University of Washington and further 
north that is scheduled to open in 2016. 
PRESENT STATE OF SEATTLE
My goal is to in the end have a specific building, with a specific program on a specific site, but the 
decisions what will lead me to that will be a part of my process.

Right now: Seattle is my site. I walk the city everyday and until I come home, I will continue to ex­
plore new neighborhoods and possible sites. I will not stop my process of exploration until I really 
have to. 

When starting the project, my plan is to have three potential sites to analyze and select from. The 
choice of the site will be an important factor of deciding the program. 

The different neighborhoods in Seattle are all very different, and that is something everyone is very 
proud of. The reason for this development is the almost sprawling city that got expanded during the 
early 1900s, and it is something I think is important when working with this city. I want the program 
to respond this characteristic, so the site and the program will be developed under the same time.

General interests
Public (at least parts) building, interesting program combination, small footprint allows for greater 
detail 
Possible: gallery, museum, school, mixed-use, non-conventional programs
PROGRAM & SITE IDEAS
References
Seattle

Shaping Seattle Architecture by Jeffrey Ochsner (ed.)
From past to present by Roger Sale
A guide to architecture in Washington State by Sally B. Woodbridge and Roger Montgomery
Theoretical (books)

Spatial recall by Marc Treib (ed.) 
Altering Architecture by Fred Scott
In Praise of Shadows by Junichiro Tanazaki
The eyes of the skin by Juhani Pallasmaa 
Constancy and change in Architecture by Bruce Webb and Malcolm Quantrill (ed)
Context: New buildings in historic setting by John Warren, John Worthington, Sue Taylor (ed.)
Losing Site: Architecture, Memory and Place by Shelley Hornstein 

Articles
Viewpoint: Vernacular Architecture and Public History by Edward A. Chappel
The Cult of Age in Mass-Society: Alois Riegl’s Theory of Conservation by Thordis Arrhenius
Architecture from Architecture: Encounters between Conservation and Restoration by Manuel J 
Martin-Hernandez
Going critical: On the Historic Preservation of World’s first nuclear reactor by Paul Williams
Memory without monuments: Vernacular Architecture by Stanford Anderson
Exhibition review: Altered states of Preservation, Preservation by OMA/AMO by Teresa Stoppan
Prada Fondazione - OMA
Hotel Fouquet Barrière - Edouard François 
Candida Höfer
REFERENCES
Artists

Filip Dujardin 
Ann Hamilton
Sun-Ji
Candida Höfer
Rachel Whiteread 
Gordon Matta Clarck 
Josef Schultz
Architecture 
Carlo Scarpa
David Chipperfield (Altes Museum)
OMA (Prada Fondazione)
Graham Baba (Melrose Market)
Leo von Klenze/Hans Döllgast 
Aldo Rossi 
Ederer+ Haghirian
Edouard François
Lacaton Vassal
Rachel Whiteread
Ann Hamilton
Court house - Ederer+ Haghirian
Drawings: 
Context plan
Site plan
Building Plans
Sections,
Elevations, 
Interior/exterior elevation/section detailed studies 
Visual imagery:
Renderings/collages
Diagrams if needed 
Process images:
Collages, hand sketches, diagrams
TBD – depending on process evolution – one image every week? 
Model: 
Site/context model
Process models (many): massing, interior, detail
Final model (scale TBD – can be detail or other)
Text:
A written booklet about my research that will have a with a personal approach about my theme and 
the theoretical explorations, and precedent studies 
Sketchbook / diary: possibly combined with research booklet 
TENTATIVE DELIVERABLES
W1 Start up, theoretical readings, quick site workshop
W2 Reading, writing, site decision(latest)
W3 Reading, writing, program decision 
W4 Site model, sketching, context
W5 Context and building
W6 Reading, writing, sketching/modeling massing
W7 Reading, writing, quick spatial collages/models
W8 Plans and sections, section model
W9 Writing + drawings 
W10 Production
W11 MID REVIEW
W12 Summarize mid-review comments + potential study trip 
W13 Reading and writing
W14 Development plans and sections and elevations
W15 Interiors 
W16 Development - drawings, images
W17 Development - images, models
W18 FINAL SEMINAR
W19 Development & production
W20 Development & production
W21 FINAL PRESENTATION
TENTATIVE SCHEDULE
